---
layout: post
title:  "Math as Club"
date:   2020-12-1 04:18:19 -0600
categories: jekyll update
---

When anything is important enough, it doesn't fail to stir up partisan feelings. Tribalism needs no encouragement in humans, and the centrality of anything in a heterogeneous society--especially one which heaps at least verbal praise on the idea of heterogeneity (independent of its actually encouraging or rewarding it)--will create sides of for and against. The tension of yes versus no pushes proponents to worship rather than accept or use, and either side shoves farther away from the uncomfortable middle, the province of cognitive dissonance. But we're not here to talk about social psychology; we're here to talk about math.

Depending on how broad an audience is polled, different reasons might surface as to why this discipline is held in so much higher acclaim than the study of other languages. The best partition of opinion might be according to when someone managed to stop thinking about math, since most everyone has been forced to at some point. Those who got out quickly might regard the mathy with an incomprehension lying somewhere between contempt and respect. Others, who took advanced courses in high school and university, might know of math's centrality to the sciences and of the sciences' centrality to innovation and growth. We might call theirs an extrinsic respect. Math majors think of it as the epitome of thought, a world of proof, dialectics, and persuasion. To not be mathematically-minded is to be superstitious, practically. Then we get to the truly mathy, for whom doing math is as much a choice as it is for the rest of us to breathe.

The reputation draws on truth. It is a difficult subject, one of abstraction and unnatural symbols and words. And yet, despite its difficulty, it is basically universal in the sciences and business. Without math we wouldn't have accounting, statistics, or physics, and thus wouldn't have planes, data analysis, cell phones, computers, or any electronics for that matter. It certainly is useful, if not natural.

The utility of math, both in clarifying communication and fostering invention, lends it a stubborn glimmer. Data science, a field where mathematics, statistics, and computer science bounce tasks around to each other, was called the sexiest job of the 21st century. Studies that make mathematical claims are cited by laypeople without respect to methodology or replicability. A statistic without a source somehow feels more credible in conversation than a story without a source, because it's composed of numbers instead of words. The authority of mathematics has become a cudgel, swinging around real mathematical achievement and expanding the field's influence. 

The credulousness around math's products and claims is exemplified in the field of economics. Here, there are allegations that a work's reception and its mathiness are basically proportional, with quality ignored. Nobel prize laureate Paul Romer even uses the term "mathiness" disparagingly, accusing his fellow macroeconomists of employing math to obfuscate rather than to clarify. Assertion has supplanted argument.

It is ironic that the field whose language requires that no assumption goes unjustified has been commandeered to abet dogma. The difficulty of mathematics is wielded to intellectually gaslight would-be critics, silencing them with a language that they cannot understand or talk back in. Anyone who doesn't have a background in banach spaces must then concede the debate not because of the strength of an idea but because it's hidden from view, math and jargon both serving as shadow. Different camps can avoid each other's lines of fire and continue believing in their rightness simply by not listening to each other.

Polarity and the resulting impossibility of persuasion is easier to tolerate when you understand nothing about the other side than when you understand some. It's easiest to think of villains as  fixedly or willfully evil, ignorant or selfish, regardless of whether they were to live in their circumstances or ours. You have to wonder, then, whether a cohesive world came up with an idea that divided it, and both sides were happy enough to stop both listening to and trying to be understood by the other side when it came time to either fight for each other or drift apart. When we can sate our need for connection either comfortably with our own kind or wrenchingly with some other, who among us will choose the latter?
