---
layout: post
title:  "Amusing Ourselves to Death!"
date:   2020-12-30 23:38:53 -0600
categories: jekyll update
---
Warnings about television are not new. From parents to academics to religious leaders, many of our authorities have demonstrated a deep suspicion of it. Intuition and empirics both associate television with decay more than with growth, with the fogging up and graying out of minds, spirits, and relationships more than their sharpening or saturating. As wth many warnings that come often and from all sides, these warnings have incorporated into a stale conventional wisdom that most everyone ignores. 
    
From eating your vegetables to turning off the TV, we all know what is best. But no one ever earned dessert by watching _The Simpsons_ first. So why do we all avoid vegetables and flock to the TV? Have we learned no lessons from earning ice cream? 
    
It's probably in part because it's been so long since you last argued with someone over whether TV was the best use of time or not. The obvious is ignored, not because of our skepticism, but because of our boredom. Conflict is more likely to find purchase in thought and conversation than is consent. What is agreed upon is forgotten. "Use it or lose it," the neuroscientists say. We have lost our distaste for television, and thus its universal disrepute serves as an anchor for it at the front and center of any time we can give it.
    
The book which perhaps most famously criticizes television, _Amusing Ourselves to Death_, can thus at once be beloved and ignored. It's in good company with books like the New Testament or _Digital Minimalism_, a group nominally-loved and paid scant heed. The ideas therein, of non-violent resistance and love advocated for by Jesus Christ or the rejection of social media espoused by Cal Newport, are at their heart social critiques. This kind of critique puts at odds our experienced social order, wherein people find meaning and fulfillment, with a suggestion for abandoning it, which can feel unfamiliar to the extent that it can be understood and uncertain to the extent that it can't be. In the words of David Brooks: "Humans are primarily relational, and not rational, creatures." A social critique by definition pits relations against reason, as a society is nothing more or less than our relationships. As such, social critiques have an especially hard time hitting their rubber to the road. 
    
Maybe this explains the corps of journalists who take up the standard of _Amusing Ourselves to Death_--that television is bad for us because of its contents' brevity, lack of context, and outsize devotion to entertainment--and so in 160-character tweets. Going on cable news to tell people to turn it off takes on a different level of irony depending on whether you plug your own show or not. 
    
It's one thing for your culture's pathology to snap into focus. However, with this era's spawn of TV offspring that would have doubly horrified Postman, our discourse can feel like a chanted rebuke of a slippery slope to the rhythm of our march further down it. Maybe this is wrong, and really what's going on is that we don't want to throw out the baby with the bathwater; Postman didn't get it totally right, and we can reject parts of his book while embracing others. We're certainly able to do this while buying into Jesus's injunction to turn the other cheek while rejecting his claim to divinity. Or maybe, no matter how bad television is, it is here to say, and we can't let the perfect (no TV) be the enemy of the fine (some good TV) in avoiding the worst (all bad TV, everyone transfixed). 

Concretely, Postman's thought centralizes around a few nuclear ideas. First, "the clearest way to see through a culture is to attend to its tools for conversation." Humans' extreme sociality virtually guarantees that community and the individuals within it are formative of each other. The fact that our societies often displease us in a non-trivial number of ways coupled with the fact that people act differently than individual persons do can instill in us a felt distance from our community. Yet, every decision made is by some set of individuals. As individuals, what is an intuition of the self as an island must grapple with the reality of our reflecting the world around us. We behave mimetically. We decide what to believe based on availability heuristics. We decide what to value based on what is seen as valuable by our parents and peers. What we are and what we've seen share no clear boundary. To see through our culture is to see through us.
            
Postman says this is done through conversation. This is because the contents of the conversation are determined by the medium in which it happens. In Postman's words, "The medium is the metaphor." A photograph is better-suited to capture a facial expression than a mood in a conversation, and an audio recording does the inverse. If you are trying to communicate and have a camera instead of a tape recorder, then you will try to capture scenes instead of arguments, and what isn't captured is lost and, ultimately, forgotten. That which is allowed by a medium is encouraged. 
            
Consider a human who only consumes photographs and a human who only consumes podcasts. Both will process the information presented to them; the question is how. The former will be inclined to do so in the language of photography, since that is the language that they take in. They might feel the tragedy of a funeral through a filter of black and white, or might augment the joy of a new love with vivid color, or might remember the birth of a child by a single image. The latter, using the language of a podcast, might instead think of the tragedy as subdued, reverent speech, or the excitement of love as a voice uncontained, or the birth of a child by the wailing. Thus, we absorb the parameters of our media into the rest of life.((I wonder about changing the format of this to be more concise, so instead of repeating the triple for each scenario, maybe have the two scenarios, then the triple with the alternatives. That way you only have to say "birth of a child" once.)) The parameters of a medium are more or less appropriate depending on what is to be accomplished. Postman claims that the parameters of television, inherited into the rest of thought, make for disastrous consequences. 
        
If you could see through the culture of 18th and 19th century America, then, by examining the prominent venue for conversation (the written word of the pamphlet), you can see through 20th and 21st century America by examining the television. The written word--reasoned, sequential, argued--allowed for its audience to absorb its rules and parameters into their own cognition. This made for the well-read citizenry of what Postman deems "Typographic America" where the population was made up of informed and carefully-thinking citizens. These were able to not just sit through but absorb a 7 hour debate between Abraham Lincoln and Steven Douglas. Contrast that with "Televisic America" of the last century. Television's main inheritance is one of speed, abundance, and lack-of-context, passed down from  media parents of the telegram and the photograph. The former medium allowed more information to travel farther and faster, and much more information began to travel, filling the ears of residents of California with not just news from Los Angeles, but out of D.C., Manhattan, and the capitals of every major nation. As it happens, this turns out to be quite a bit of information, flooding the bandwidth of a species developed in the context of local, relevant, and continuous information. The second medium, the photograph, captured moments, not stories, and attempted to emphasize focus on them, having its products self-contained as opposed to part of a broader ecosystem of meaning. Thus, television, in passively enabling these attributes of speed, abundance, and lack-of-context, actually encourages them. Their guaranteeing arises not just from the conversation assuming this new form, but from the human craving of the novel, which assures the form's grip on conversation and, by extension, thought.
            
Television can't be treated as just a faster version of what preceded it, though. Never before this medium had there been a way to endow communication with such richness. Going from oral communication to written and painted communication to eventually printing pressed communication, humanity saw progressively more bundles of thought and feeling copied and tucked into packets called arts, letters, and books. The slowness of traveling to speak to someone, quickened by the ability to send mail (by a person who was paid not to run a farm but a mail route), and eventually broadened by many copies of a letter printed and sent all around the world, gave abled communicators unimaginable widths of audience in a fraction of the time. Organizing the demos at Athens into a crowd to hear your speech gave way to publishing at the Royal society of London which gave way to hundreds of cable channels with a community for each one. Websites bring in an instant an article authored by a person in New York to readers 12 hours away at over 500 miles an hour. It's an unthinkable thing until it becomes unremarkable and a zoom call between Los Angeles and Singapore feels more like a chore than a miracle. As production is democratized, a channel is able to be as funny in the Chris D'Elia vein as possible, maybe even forging new territory, while its neighbor is able to get as sentimentally Hallmark as possible, and all one needs to do is change the channel to get from whatever mood to whatever mood. There is not just beautiful music, but gorgeous vistas, penned words, choreography, and narrative constructions to please our every sensibility. Not only are the boundaries pushed in every direction possible, but there are myriad directions in which many mavericks push. Depth and breadth are covered. If what has always haunted humans--cognitive dissonance and desire and lack--is Goliath, TV rises to the task as 20th-century-and-beyond-David.
            
This all sounds very utopian, very itself-suited-to-a-TV-narrative. But the heart of this production is capitalized, and the bottom line of the product and the attention given it wind up reliably in each other's orbit. Thus, even to survive, but certainly to thrive, producers must compete with each other to capture people, and thus they will descend as far down the novelty slope as needs be to do so. Consider TikTok, Twitter, Instagram, and YouTube, the spawn of TV that dominate the entertainment landscape today. Consider the fact that not only do they allow for quick cuts and channel-surfing, but that there are actual constraints. The default mode for Instagram is to channel surf, rather than to watch a specific channel for any longer than an oscillation of the thumb. There is a maximum length to TikTok videos and a character limit on tweets. If TV allowed brevity, the web 2.0 intubated us with it.
        
Reading this in 2020, one cannot help but hear strains of _Her_, _Infinite Jest_, _The Matrix_, an archetypal story we're familiar with in which humans' utopia turns out an undoing. But Postman didn't wind up there. Rather, he proceeds to argue that the ills of television are not in their general addictivity or in their grasp on our attention, but in their corruption of public discourse and serious debates. Shows for pure entertainment were fine, since people could easily discern _M*A*S*H_ from real life. It was the thorny, complicated thought required for solving real, difficult problems we all recognized as distinct from those explored in fiction that should be untouched by the trickery of television. The treatment of difficult, unsolved questions, like those of God or politics requires almost by definition a lengthy, arduous process of reasoning and consideration, else these problems might be closer to being solved. This is unsuited to the short attention span accommodated by television. Entertainment's soothing is its pacifying, and progress requires a fight.
            
Television may, in the abstract, have the capacity for tedious serious thought, but more importantly, television has the language for the more exciting unserious thought. It's not that television can't do it; it's that we don't want it to. With the ability to delight us with colors, music, beautiful people, and all things novel and emotional, why would we settle for tedious, sequential, logical arguments. Postman argued that because TV was capable of delighting us, that which didn’t delight us would be squelched, and in an adaptive culling, we’d be left with only that which tasted sweetest, regardless of its nutritional value. TV was fine to delight us so long as it didn’t venture into the serious realms of education, policy, and religion. Isn’t this to say that these subject matters would interfere with the parts of our brain that mattered, while leaving the rest alone?

Postman's harbinger must ring true and false if we are to reconcile what we say and what we do. Many of us in open conversation see a decay in our collective self at the hands of TV. But if we were really convinced that TV were all that bad, it seems like we wouldn't choose to spend our weekends watching Netflix, our dates watching Netflix, and our parties longing for Netflix. 
    
Of course, what's unlikely is that we even recognize this cognitive dissonance until we start reading or writing an essay like this. It's probably more likely that people think that TV is bad and somehow turn it in spite of that conviction, failing to recognize their watching TV as such. Humans are famously good at this kind of thing, muting the badness of something by the extenuation of circumstance, justification through boredom or sadness that has never been so truly felt as now. Being issued a moral survey on abstract behavior never aligns very well with what we do. But we can diagnose the reasons we ignore the injunction to turn off the TV or we can diagnose whether we ought to. Maybe the herculean task of getting society off of cable news isn't worth it if we find reasons that leaving the TV on is actually just fine, despite its popular unpopularity.
    
Even if television turns down our ability to think in dialectics, we might still decide that society should have tools besides reason to make decisions and act. The equation of reason and thinking is in fact a conflation, and human thought at least includes, if doesn't insist on, a wider spectrum of modalities. In contrast to Plato's view of reason as a human's peak policy, Thomas Jefferson believed that reason and passion operate hand in hand. David Hume leaned even farther away from Plato in his insistence that reason operated not just equally, but downstream of the passions, serving them and not itself. Certainly reason's static detachment can itself fail to give us any energy to act. The same cannot be said of emotions, which lead us reliably to actually _do_ all sorts of better or worse things.
        
Television might be better suited to speak this language. We can see refugees in camps or police cars on fire. We're more affected by seeing one child stalked by a vulture than by statistics abstractly representing hundreds of thousands of starving children in Yemen. This mode of persuasion, of empathizing with a human being who is seen, not counted or described, can't be shown by books. In this sense, TV expands our horizons of persuasion and education even when it comes to serious discourse. Revolutions are won by critical masses of people winning each other over, for better or for worse. Television allows viewers to be inspired by seeing live footage of protests that can excite empathy. It can show viewers their fellow humans drumming up morality and courage, which can bolster a courage that otherwise might shrink. These are difficult persuasions to wage in logic.
        
This might be because reason is incapable of understanding the intuitions we can't reason about but want to hold fast. No person in a non-agrarian economy is reasonable in having a child, for example, when their day to day happiness will reliably decrease. It is not reason that motivates a climate warrior who knows that we are engaged in the greatest prisoner’s dilemma in human history and that a climate accord is less likely now than it was in the late 80s when it didn't have to sputter but did. The kind of non-complementarity that Jesus espouses makes no sense, except as an appeal to a sense of right and wrong, an inheritance from theological tradition un-bucked by the secular world.
    
But this very capacity to stir up feeling is what gives fangs to Postman's safest part of television: the honest entertainment. This genre is represented back then by _M*A*S*H_, today by the Marvel enterprise. Postman considered this part of entertainment safe because viewers could obviously tell the difference between it and real life. With serious discourse, on the other hand, the nature of television as a medium inevitably leads to a distorted epistemology of what is true based on what is exciting and who looks best (certainly, good-looking and bad-looking people are perfectly equal absent television!). If only we could keep serious matters off TV, we could avoid being persuaded of silly things by preserving the integrity of our logic.
        
Persuasion is not siloed to the analytical, unfortunately. For every person who was persuaded of the rightness of gay marriage, there was at least another who saw more gay couples around and got used to it. The robust finding of an availability heuristic in psychology suggests that a person is willing to accept an idea for nothing more than having been exposed to it enough times. Persuasion can happen by insistence as well as by reasoned argument. The increased retention rates associated with emotional experience suggest that maybe entertainment designed to elicit specific affective responses is a more powerful teacher than the keenest philosopher. There is a reason that the number of fiction books we buy exceeds the non-fiction books we buy, and even among the non-fiction books we buy, the most popular are biography/autobiography/memoir, followed by history. These are the categories which most closely resemble fiction books, since they contain stories rather than theses.
        
Spending hundreds or thousands of hours over the course of one's life watching material optimized to get a multi-dimensional rise out of you is likely to persuade you of a thing or two. At least with bad argument you can notice it happening, whether or not you're credulous. Indeed, on account of being a less recognized process of persuasion and arguably being more effective, honest entertainment might be worse than bad public discourse.
        
The very act of getting to choose what we will watch might affect us as deeply as what we are watching. The economist Barry Schwartz's _Paradox of Choice_ illustrates that an abundance of choice doesn't make us happier. Intuition says that between a batch of 100 options and a batch of 10 options, the bigger batch is more likely to contain a satisfactory choice. Intuition, it would appear, misleads in this case. A huge number of choices decreases our satisfaction and our rate of making a choice at all. With more choice, we must  confront more opportunity cost, in this case either the 9 options we chose against or the 99, while only getting the one we chose to keep. The cost-benefit ratio is higher in the bigger batch than the smaller batch, the denominator representing a static benefit and the numerator representing a growing cost with each forgone option. With TV, more channels and more flipping build into us an expectation of a remote in hand, and when we can't change the channel from a conversation we are in, dissatisfaction rears its bored head. As entertainment gets more immersive, it's no wonder that the lessons we're learning now didn't find their way into a book written in 1985 by a man born in 1931.

Complicated answers are shocking in their own way because humans like neat, tidy answers. In the exceedingly rare occasion that there are tradeoffs to a decision, it can be tempting to throw up one's hands and declare the balance of good and bad unknowable, especially when they are hard to quantify (another rare occurrence). We might learn our instinct for collapsing decisions down into "bad" and "good" from dualistic world-views/theologies. We might learn it from capitalism and science, two pillars of our society, both of which have optimization as a main pursuit. Profit is equal to revenue minus cost, and revenue is all the units you sell times the price you sell them at, and cost is all the units you produce times the price it cost to make them. If we're optimizing for profit, then the world is the same whether cost goes down by one unit or revenue goes up by one unit.
        
Postman’s warning makes dogmatic claims about the unfitness of television for carrying public discourse. It also calls what might seem like an even more dangerous part of television safe. A person of his generation was able to imagine that the show business discourse of real things like religion, politics, and education would be conflated with reality, leading us to expect show business where it has no business showing itself. What he was unable, apparently, to imagine, is that our generation would conflate everything with television. Love, career, the very meaning of one’s own life--these all become bound up with our inheritance from TV, our cultural provenance providing enough distraction that you fail to experience any one thing for experiencing too much of everything.
