---
layout: post
title:  "Evolution's Rhetorical Creep"
date:   2020-2-31 16:07:00 -0600
categories: jekyll update
---
Evolution has become a catch-all device for explaining human behavior, much to the detriment of the arguments that mistake its ubiquity for unconditional applicability. I think things have become this way through a process I'll call "rhetorical creep". This essay will first motivate itself by presenting a problematic instance of this evolutionary postulating. Then it will explain rhetorical creep in the abstract and explain why it might have happened with evolution in the concrete. The obvious call to action of this essay is to cease and desist. 

Ezra Klein's book __Why We're Polarized__ uses evolution to explain human behavior two times in the first 100 pages, which occasioned this essay. 

The first instance is where Klein draws on an interview with Vivek Murthy, where it is asserted that we evolved to be social creatures since loneliness causes a stress state in the human body. This encourages us to gather in groups where we were more likely to survive. 

It's ungenerous to say that the reason this sounds convincing is that Ezra Klein is a distinguished journalist or that Vivek Murthy was and again will be surgeon general or even that we have been conditioned to believe arguments like these because they are so widely leveraged by the very Kleins and Murthys we take our cues from in authoritative, elite circles. The more generous take is that it's believable because it's loosely based on a well-established fact. Offspring everywhere is endowed with life-extending traits via natural selection. Humans experience at least some of these traits subjectively, perceiving reward and punishment for, respectively, good behavior like eating and bad behavior like getting hit with a rock. This logic can imply that whenever you see a bad consequence following bad behavior (or good for good), the architect of this causality is evolution. In short, because evolution created some reward structures, we assume all rewards can be explained by evolution.

The thing that makes this example easy to pick on is that it isn't even clear how the described stress state would encourage the mind in it to squad up, as Murthy/Klein assert. It might be plausible if "stress state" meant a longing to be with others; instead, it means higher levels of inflammation. Are we to suppose that humans are encouraged to join back up with the tribe because they are sensitive to the rising inflammation in their blood vessels? 

Even if the proposed consequence of loneliness were likely to solve it, like experiencing sadness because one misses friends and family and thus actively desires and plans to be with them, a feasible explanation is not an authoritative one. While a randomized control trial with a control and treatment group between otherwise identical populations could never happen, we ought to avoid the position that something is so because it is feasible. 

The second instance is where Klein draws on his own reason to assert that variance in the big 5 personality traits is evolutionarily advantageous. Republicans are more conscientious, and democrats are more open to new experience. These are character traits, not compliments or insults, says Klein. "Evolutionarily, the power is in the mix of outlooks, not in any one outlook--that's why this psychological diversity has survived."

If evolution actually is random mutations all up and down the genome, resulting in concrete differences in organisms that, in the aggregate, result in higher or lower likelihood of survival, then variance is reliably likely to be present for nonadaptive traits, ones that don't actually matter for survival. This is because every organism is endowed with more or less of each random trait given the roll of the genetic dice, the hand they were dealt. If there is a trait, say strength, that is useful for survival, and another trait, say unibrows, that is useless for survival (assume unibrows are useless for survival with me just for the sake of argument and we will resurrect our ideological differences at a later juncture), then there will be a selection for strength and not for unibrows. This means that the bottom half of the distribution along the axis of strength will get lopped off, and along the axis of unibrows, there will be no lopping off because whether you have an unbroken perfection of brow or absolute smoothness in between your brows, you will have survived because you are strong, not specifically-browed. There will still be a normal distribution of unibrowed people, most in the middle, some high, some low, laid out in bell curve. So variance might be useful, as Klein says. But a perfectly viable alternative explanation is that the variance is there in openness and conscientiousness precisely because these traits don't matter at all to evolution.

To be clear, it's not that I don't believe evolution has given shape to human behavior. I think I do. But a great idea can turn on itself, ironically, by its very greatness. The idea is catapulted from obscurity to popularity on the thrust of its merit, and every pass from hand to hand and mouth to ear means another opportunity for miscommunication, whether deliberate or not. We're quick to frown on deceit, but innocuous miscommunication has the same essential result. In both cases, people misunderstand because the authority of a good idea is arrogated by the commandeering of its language. This is the "buzz" in buzzword, and it is how phrases like "science has told us X" and "studies show Y" can feel final and authoritative. A common vexation aired by researchers is journalists' ability to make a peer-reviewed finding unrecognizably more interesting. Whether by chance or will, then, ideas with legs kick up mud.

The theory of evolution, then, is one such idea. It's so well-attested as to have made its way from theory to conventional wisdom. It's elegant and descriptive of reality. According to the theory, the diversity of species is owed to the process of natural selection. In it, random mutations occur in an organism's genome upon being conceived, and if these mutations help that organism to survive, then it will survive and procreate more often than its peers, causing these evolved traits to persist through the surviving genealogies. 

The problem arises when that post-controversial idea drifts into what it isn't, as has happened in the case of the evolutionary postulates above. According to this line of thought, natural selection gave rise to an attribute because of some explanation that is both sensible and, unfortunately, unfounded. The inheritance of evolutionary language lends these claims their uncritical acceptance, in spite of the fact that they are most likely misleading. 
